Despite its massive budget, long development cycle and almost constant presence in the news, I can say without doubt that the 2016 U.S. Presidential election is the worst video game I've ever played. Period.

I realize that there's a lot of fanboys out there who will be really mad at me for saying that, but as far as I can tell, this is a game that probably never should have been made. For all the hype around it over the past two years, it's a game that feels like it was developed in another era, using antiquated design concepts, by a bunch of old men who know nothing about what makes a game fun.

And even though just about everybody is talking about it, and about a third of eligible players are playing it, the game is so bad it makes true stinkers like Aliens: Colonial Marines and massive disappointments like No Man's Sky look like comparitive masterpieces.

Let's talk about all the ways the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election is a terrible video game deserving only our scorn, and not our hard earned time and money.

Recommended by Forbes
Why Bethesda Is Wrong About Its New Video Game Review Policy Even If You Hate...
'Battlefield 1' Is Stunningly Beautiful On PC
SAPVoice: 3 Ways To Build And Engage Your "All-In" Workforce

'Titanfall 2' Has A Really Amazing Single Player Campaign
Why Kotaku Is Wrong About 'Call Of Duty: Infinite Warfare's 'Dumbest Momen...
MOST POPULAR Photos: 2017 30 Under 30: The Standouts
+211,084 VIEWS Meet The 2017 Class Of 30 Under 30
MOST POPULAR Photos: 2017 30 Under 30: Finance
MOST POPULAR Apple Considers Google-Style Augmented Reality Glasses

We'll start off with gameplay, which is a confusing mess of contradictions.

The core concepts here simply don't work, making for a confusing, clunky experience.

And the tutorial is so bad you won't just have difficulty understanding how to play, you'll have a hard time figuring out why you should play at all.

1. Character Creation

We'll start with character creation. You have four basic teams to choose from. Democrats, Republicans, Greens, and Libertarians. The thing is, right off the bat there's balancing issues. Democrats and Republicans are seriously over-powered and need to be nerfed. It's so bad, there's almost no point in even playing Greens and Libertarians unless you want to lose. (Sure, their Principled stat gets a huge boost, but they start with virtually no Resources and can't even play the Debate game mode, which is kind of a big part of the game...)

Once you've picked a team, then you get to select your character. Leaving the Greens and Libertarians aside for now (because, come on, nobody plays these teams anyways) the Democrats and Republicans have really unbalanced choices. Democrats have way fewer characters to choose from, and the only black character you can play is a Republican. Which is just...strange. At least on the Democratic side you could play Bernie Sanders also, but the cards are really stacked against that character so even if he is the most likeable guy in the game, you're still basically screwed if you choose him as your starting character.

Ultimately, the choice comes down to, what I think, are the two of the worst possible characters. On the Democratic side your only viable choice is Hillary Clinton, an ice queen with high stats in Deception and Intrigue.

While it's nice that women are getting some representation in the game, the fact is this character is more robot than anything. You might as well be playing a Cylon from Battlestar Galactica.

On the Republican side, it's like the game's writers didn't even know what a Republican was to begin with. Your only viable choice is Donald Trump, who has high scores in Oratory and Resources, but incredibly low scores in Morals and Conservatism, which is sort of weird all things considered.

There's practically no customization. You get to choose which pant-suit Clinton wears, but you can't even change Trump's tupee. And skin color can't be customized at all, so you're stuck with one white character and one orange character. Pretty limiting. Pretty lame.

The one fun thing is picking Sidekicks. The most important of these is the Vice President. The Democratic sidekick that most people pick is actually not that interesting. Tim Kaine, despite his cool last name, is just too nice and boring. On the Republican side, however, you get to pick this really cool supervillain named Mike Pence. I think a lot of players would have preferred him as the main character, but oh well.

Regardless of who you pick, your choices have little impact on how the game ends.


Gallery
Election Day 2016
Launch Gallery
7 images
  
2. Mechanics

The game's mechanics are incredibly limiting and frankly don't make much sense. There's this entire meta-game called the Electoral College that's incredibly hard to understand, and of course the tutorial never explains it.

Meanwhile, in the first part of the game, if you play on the Democratic side you have this special superdelegate mechanic that makes Clinton seriously way more powerful than Sanders (come on devs, where are the nerfs?) Clinton is pretty much OP the entire time, though Clinton has such a remarkably high Diversion score that even her toughest attack moves seem to slide right off him. (Thankfully Clinton's powerful Ice Stare can counter Trump's devestating Grope attack, leaving the two on fairly even footing for much of the game.)

Gameplay itself is slow and tedious, and you have to deal with all kinds of crazy encounters with various NPCs: angry activists, annoying reporters, and comedians who think they're a lot funnier than they are. The writing through most of the game is atrocious. A lot of times pundits say things that nobody in their right mind would say, and the reporters almost always report on the news in really biased ways, no matter which side you pick.

Making matters worse, the whole game is massively region-locked. Depending on where you play, the rules change. Some regions, like Iowa, use a 'caucus' mechanic, while others use regular voting. Both teams engage in a mechanic called 'gerrymandering' which is basically a mini-game that lets you tinker with voting in various constituencies to benefit your party. (This is actually kind of fun if you enjoy figuring out how to screw over your opponent's supporters.)

The meat of the game takes place playing various mini-games like Pundit Wars, Super PAC, and Debate! but these mini-games get boring quickly, and I ended my playthrough feeling tired and overwhelmed. By and large, it's a stressful, negative experience with few redeeming qualities.

A good game is like a good hike or a good road trip: All about the journey, not about the destination. The 2016 U.S. Presidential Election tries to buck that trend---maybe they're trying to be innovative, I don't know---and make it all about the destination. The results are predictably bad.

3. Graphics

While the graphics are pretty photo-realistic at times, the uncanny valley kicks in pretty quickly. I mean, just take a look at this screenshot. You can tell right away this is computer graphics:


(Credit: Sarah Rice/Getty Images)

A real person? I don't think so. The developers couldn't even decide what color his hair is supposed to be, let alone his skin-tone.

Or how about this one:


(Credit: JEWEL SAMAD/AFP/Getty Images)

That's not a real, human facial expression on Clinton's face. That's CGI, and not even very good CGI. That's like George Lucas prequel Star Wars trilogy level of bad CGI. Those empty eyes...so hollow and lifeless.

Beyond this, the color palette in the game is way too limited. It's almost all red, blue, white and black. Even if you (for some crazy reason) join the Green team, they pretty much stick to red, white and blue just like everybody else. The one chromatic variation is Trump's skin tone, and the one encounter you have with the once-powerful NPC overlord John Boehner, whose orange glow puts even Trump to shame. Here's another screenshot:


Boehner wielding a powerful secret weapon. (Credit: SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images)

Season Pass

Another mark against this game is its expensive season pass. In one form or another, you'll be paying for your character choices for years to come.

Final Verdict

This has never been a very good franchise, but at least in past releases we've had better character choices.

In the last game that came out in the series, 2012 U.S. Presidential Election, we got to choose between Barack Obama, who had high stats in Oratory, Reasonableness and Charm, and Mitt Romney who had high stats in Business Acumen and Reasonableness. This year we get Hillary with literally a zero in Charm and Trump who has high Luck but terrible Business Acumen despite his high Resources score.

At least in the last game, we got to talk about the issues a little bit. I mean, it was obvious that the writers were having a hard time defining what a Republican was, but at least the Tea Party mini-game was a cool diversion. Making the NPC Glenn Beck cry on national TV was fun. And at least there were some likable characters.

Of course, even then the franchise couldn't get game balance right. Starting as a Democrat or Republican is and always has been the only way to succeed at this game, and without a very, very high Resources score you're almost certainly done for. Newer additions like the Super PAC mini-game only make this even worse. I really wish they'd bring back the Campaign Finance Reform mini-game, but yeah, I get it, it's kind of dry.

The one thing I can say in the game's favor is that at least in this release and the 2012 release, we had a couple character creation options that weren't just old white guys. Sure, Hillary may be a robot, but at least she's a female robot. And Obama was the first black character we were able to choose in the franchise which, given the history of this franchise, is kind of a big deal also. But these few glimmers of redemption do not a good game make.

Meanwhile, graphics are only so-so and the setting---which largely takes place in news rooms, warehouses, and sports pavillions---is a little mundane, mirroring the gameplay shortcomings. It's a largely confusing, often nihilistic experience, that will leave you stressed out and tired. In the end, half of the people who play it will almost certainly be really angry by the time the curtain falls. The other half, far from feeling satisfaction or elation, will feel nothing but relief.

Whatever small merits this video game has---its use of the democracy mechanic is certainly preferable to many others like fascism or communism---the game is still largely not worth your time. I give it a "Sell" on my Buy/Hold/Sell scale. Don't even bother waiting for a sale.

If anything, write to the developers and demand that they make the next release better. Give more options for the other teams---let them play in the Debate! mini-game at the very least---and make the rules less confusing and more accessible. I'd also nerf the Resources stat, and make it easier for more and better options to exist. Oh, and the Voter Intimidation mechanic (which includes a Voter ID mini-game) is just obnoxious. Let's get rid of that for the 2020 release.

As it stands, The 2016 U.S. Presidential Election is a broken mess of a video game. Some have even suggested it's rigged, though I haven't been able to figure out the cheat codes yet.

Regardless, it's not worth your time and money and I can't wait for it to be over.

2016 U.S. Presidential Election

Platform: American Democracy

Publisher: U.S. Constitution

Developers: Republican and Democratic Parties, News Media, The Electorate

Score: 3/10 (points added for entertainment value)

Cost: $1.9 billion